Move build files into pycode/memilio-simulation and update actions (#1566)
SciCompMod/memilio: docs/source/download_and_setup.rst

Download and setup
==================

> MEmilio consists of a core library written in C++, including several models and examples, as well as several python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MEmilio consists of a core library written in C++, including several models and examples, as well as several Python
```

packages

We have structured this documentation to guide you step-by-step through the installation and usage process.
If you still need help, feel free to `contact us <mailto:Martin.Kuehn@DLR.de>`__ or open an issue at `GitHub <https://github.com/SciCompMod/memilio/issues>`__ 
and highlight @mknaranja and @HenrZu such that we can assist you as best as we can.

There are two main ways to set up MEmilio on your computer or on a remote cluster or supercomputer,
depending on what you want to do:

> 1.  **Using the Python packages:** This is the recommended path for many users not familiar with C++.

Reviewer: Here, a distinction between the memilio-simulation package and the other packages is necessary as only the memilio-simulation package can be installed via PyPI and for the other you need to install from source and thus  install memilio.

>     Here, you can run simulations using python bindings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Here, you can run simulations using Python bindings.
```

>     If you have a working python installation, head to :ref:`python-package-installation` and install the package from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you have a working Python installation, head to :ref:`python-package-installation` and install the package from
```

    PyPI (Option 1).
    Otherwise, continue here for the setup instructions.

2.  **Directly building the C++ Core:** This is for developers who want to modify the functionality,
    contribute new models etc. by running C++ code directly.

In addition, we provide several Python packages to download epidemiological data or create plots from Python.

Below, we will give you a step-by-step guide for both methods. If you are new to MEmilio and more familiar with Python, 
Julia, or R than with C++, we recommend starting with the Python packages, as they provide an easy access to simulate 

> infection dynamics models from and collect experiences with MEmilio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
infection dynamics models and gain experience with MEmilio.
```

.. _general-setup-section:

Setup: Required tools
---------------------

Before you can install MEmilio, you need to install some common development tools. 

*   **Python:** Required for the Python packages.

    MEmilio is tested daily with `Python <https://www.python.org/>`__ 3.9 and 3.13.
    While other versions may also work, we recommend using the latest release of either of these. 
    
    .. dropdown:: :fa:`gears` Python installation help

>         You can check whether python is installed by opening a terminal and running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        You can check whether Python is installed by opening a terminal and running
```

        .. code-block:: console

            python --version

        or 

        .. code-block:: console

            python3 --version

>         to see which version is installed, if any - otherwise it will say "command not found" or something similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        to see which version is installed. If no installation can be found it will say "command not found" or something similar.
```

>         You can also type ``python`` and hit the tab key once or twice, it may auto-complete to a python command 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        You can also type ``python`` and hit the tab key once or twice, it may auto-complete to a Python command 
```

Reviewer: Can you check the capitalization of Python in this file? This is used inconsistently

        *   On **MacOS**, you can use `homebrew <https://brew.sh/>`__ to install a specific python version,
            or use the official installer from https://www.python.org/downloads/.
            A guide can be found `here <https://docs.python.org/3/using/mac.html>`__.

        *   On **Windows**, you can use `winget <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/>`__
            to install a specific python version, or use the Python Install Manager from the
            `Microsoft Store <https://apps.microsoft.com/detail/9nq7512cxl7t>`__.
            A guide can be found `here <https://docs.python.org/3/using/windows.html>`__.

        *   On a cluster or supercomputer, python may be included as a module (e.g. through spack) that has to be
            loaded first. Check the official documentation of that system for details.

        If you are using another python management solution like conda, check out their documentation on how to set up
        an environment.

    .. note::

        In this documentation, we will simply use ``python`` as a command, but depending on your installation method

>         and platform you may need to substitute this by, e.g., ``python3``, ``python3.11``, ``.\python3.13,exe``, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        and platform you may need to substitute this by, e.g., ``python3``, ``python3.11``, ``.\python3.13.exe``, or
```

        similar.

*   **C++ Compiler and CMake:**

    *   **Windows:** The easiest way is to install **Visual Studio Community**.
        This includes a C++ compiler, CMake, and Git all in one.
    
    *   **macOS:** One option is installing the **Xcode Command Line Tools** by running
        ``xcode-select --install`` in your terminal.
    
    *   **Linux:** On Linux, essential build tools and CMake might be preinstalled. Otherwise, on Debian/Ubuntu,
        you can install them by running ``sudo apt-get install cmake gcc g++`` in your terminal.

*   **Git:** This is a version control system used to download the project's source code.

>     On Linux and MacOS, git is often preinstalled, but not on Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On Linux and MacOS, Git is often preinstalled, but not on Windows.
```
Also used inconsistently throughout this file

    You can check by opening a terminal and running ``git --version``.
    Instructions on how to download and install it can be found on `git-scm.com <https://git-scm.com/install>`__.

.. _general-download-section:

Download the MEmilio source code
--------------------------------

For C++ developement and for building python from source, it is required to download MEmilio.

You can get the newest version (or a specific release) of MEmilio from our

> `github repository <https://github.com/SciCompMod/memilio>`__, preferably by using git:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GitHub repository <https://github.com/SciCompMod/memilio>`__, preferably by using git:
```

Open a terminal and navigate to a directory of your choice, then run

.. code:: bash

    git clone https://github.com/SciCompMod/memilio

.. dropdown:: :fa:`gears` A Note on HTTPS vs. SSH

    The ``git clone`` command above uses an **HTTPS** URL. This is the simplest method and works perfectly for
    downloading the code.

    However, if you plan to contribute code back to the project (i.e., "push" your changes), we recommend using **SSH**.
    This requires a GitHub Account as well as proper authentication. To set this up, you can follow
    `GitHub's official guide on adding an SSH key <https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account>`__.

    Then, use the URL ``git@github.com:SciCompMod/memilio.git`` for cloning instead. You can also change to the ssh
    address later using

    .. code:: bash

        git remote set-url origin git@github.com:SciCompMod/memilio.git

This will create a new directory called ``memilio`` on your computer, containing the MEmilio project.
In your terminal, change into this directory:

.. code-block:: console

   cd memilio

> Alternatively, the source code can be downloaded and extracted from GitHub. This method will not include other branches

Reviewer: Do we really want to mention this in the docu when we explicitly recommend against it?

Author: I thought I'd include the method as it requires less terminal usage, but I'll remove it.

and code versions, as they are managed through git, so we recommend against it. If you do continue with this method,

> you may want to rename the extraced directory to "memilio" for consistency. Then navigate into it in a terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you may want to rename the extracted directory to "memilio" for consistency. Then navigate into it in a terminal.
```
